---
title: v0.17 is finally final!
author: Dan Gebhardt
author_title: Orbit.js Creator
author_url: https://github.com/dgeb
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/29122?v=4
tags: [release]
---

After two years, 28 beta releases, and over 400 commits, Orbit v0.17 is finally
ready! 🎉

Orbit's docs have been updated to reflect all the changes. If you are upgrading
from v0.16, the place to start is the ["What's new"](/docs/whats-new) section.

Some highlights of this release include:

* **New API reference docs** &mdash; At long last, Orbit v0.17 has [API
  docs](/docs/api) for all its packages. These docs are generated by
  [TypeDoc](https://typedoc.org/) from Orbit's typings and code annotations.
  Although a bit sparse for now, this reference should only improve with time
  and help from the community.

* **Improved, strict typings throughout** &mdash; By improving the quality of
  Orbit's TypeScript, we have been able to refactor more confidently, provide
  better documentation, and make for a better developer experience all around.

* **Extraction of `@orbit/records` from `@orbit/data`** &mdash; As part of the
  push to improve typings, it became clear that [`@orbit/data`](/docs/api/data)
  contains a number of interfaces and classes that could prove useful for _any_
  type of data, not just records. Thus, record-specific types and classes
  were extracted into a new package: [`@orbit/records`](/docs/api/records).
  Apologies for the breaking changes with module imports. We wanted to get this
  churn out of the way before the semver constraints that will come with v1.0.

* **Multi-expression queries** &mdash; Just as transforms can contain multiple
  operations, queries can now contain multiple expressions. This allows sources,
  such as `JSONAPISource`, to optionally perform these expressions in parallel.

* **Per-expression/operation options** &mdash; Along with the move to
  multi-expression queries, we've introduced per-expression options. This can be
  useful if, for instance, you want to specify a different target `url` per
  expression. Similarly, transform operations can also each have their own
  options.

* **Full vs. data-only responses** &mdash; All requests (queries and updates)
  can now be made with the `{ fullResponse: true }` option to receive responses
  in the form `{ data, details, transforms, sources }`. `data` will include the
  primary data that would be returned without the `fullResponse` option.
  `details` includes response details particular to the source, and `sources`
  includes a named map of all the responses from downstream sources that
  participated in this request. This allows you to access full response
  documents, inverse operations, etc. _from the initial request call point_.

* **Deprecation of `Pullable` and `Pushable` interfaces** &mdash; Now that
  responses can include full processing details, everything that was unique to
  the `push` and `pull` methods on source is redundant. The `Pullable` and
  `Pushable` interfaces have been deprecated to focus on the more capable
  `Queryable` and `Updatable` interfaces for making requests.

* **Transform buffers for faster cache processing** &mdash; Record-cache-based
  sources that interact with browser storage have had performance issues when
  dealing with large datasets, especially when paired with read/write heavy
  processors that ensure relationship tracking and correctness. A new paradigm
  has been developed, the `RecordTransformBuffer`, that acts as a memory buffer
  for these operations. For now, using this buffer is opt-in, with the `{
  useBuffer: true }` option. You'll be reminded to explicitly set this option to
  either `true` or `false` until you do. Early users are reporting promising
  results with IndexedDB, such as [performance boosts of > 20x with large
  numbers of
  operations](https://github.com/orbitjs/orbit/issues/798#issuecomment-800544909).

* **New serializers** &mdash; Concepts of serialization have, up until now, been
  very specific to usage by the `JSONAPISource`, and particularly the
  `JSONAPISerializer` class. This class has been deprecated and replaced with a
  series of composable serializers all built upon a simple and flexible
  [`Serializer`](/docs/api/serializers/interfaces/Serializer) interface. This
  interface, as well as some serializers for primitives (booleans, dates,
  date-times, etc.) have been published in a new package,
  [`@orbit/serializers`](/docs/api/serializers). And of course, new serializers
  particular to JSON:API have been added to
  [`@orbit/jsonapi`](/docs/api/jsonapi).

* **New validators** &mdash; A common source of problems for Orbit developers
  has been using data that is malformed or doesn't align with a schema's
  expectations. This can cause confusing errors during processing by a cache or
  downstream source. To address this problem, we're introducing "validators",
  which are shipped in a new package [`@orbit/validators`](/docs/api/validators)
  that includes some validators for primitive types. Validators that are
  record-specific have also been included in
  [`@orbit/records`](/docs/api/records). By default, each source will build its
  own set of validators and use them automatically. You can instead share a
  common set of validators via the `validatorFor` settings. And you can opt-out
  of using validators entirely by configuring your sources with `{ autoValidate:
  false }`.

* **Record normalizers** &mdash; When building queries and transforms, some
  scenarios have been more tedious than necessary: identifying records by a key
  instead of `id`, for instance, or using a model class from a lib like
  ember-orbit to reference a record instead of its json identity. A new
  abstraction has been added to make query and transform builders more flexible:
  record normalizers. Record normalizers implement the
  [`RecordNormalizer`](/docs/api/records/interfaces/RecordNormalizer) interface
  and convert record identities and/or data into a normalized form. The new base
  normalizer now allows `{ type, key, value }` to be used anywhere that `{ type,
  id }` identities can be used, which significantly reduces the annoyance of
  working with remote keys. Other normalizers,

* **Synchronous change tracking in memory forks** &mdash; Previously, memory
  source forks behaved precisely like other memory sources: every trackable
  update applied at the source level (and thus async). Now, the default (but
  overrideable) behavior is to track changes at the cache level in forks. Thus
  synchronous changes can be made to a forked cache and then merged back into
  the base source. This better accomodates the most common use case for forks:
  editing form data in isolation before merging coalesced changes back to the
  base.

* **Debug mode** &mdash; A new `debug` setting has been added to the `Orbit`
  global, that toggles between using a more verbose, developer-friendly "debug"
  mode of Orbit vs. a leaner, more performant production mode. Since debug mode
  is enabled by default, you'll need to set `Orbit.debug = false` in order to
  eliminate deprecation warnings and other debug-friendly messaging.

* **Increased reliance on The Platform™** &mdash; Orbit's codebase continues to
  evolve with the web, adopting new ES language and web platform features as
  they are released. Custom utilities have been gradually deprecated and phased
  out of the codebase (e.g. `isArray` -> `Array.isArray`), new language features
  such as nullish coalescing and optional chaining have been adopted, and
  platform features such as
  [`crypto.randomUUID`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Crypto/randomUUID)
  have been adopted (with a fallback implementation if unavailable).

These highlights are covered in more depth, including code samples, in the
["What's new"](/docs/whats-new) section of the main guides.

Thanks for your patience with this release. We expect that v0.18 will not take
nearly as long as v0.17 did. In fact, we plan to use this next release primarily
to remove deprecated interfaces in preparation for a lean and focused v1.0
release.
